The 2023 recruiting cycle is raging, but it's never too early to look ahead to the 2024 offseason. Owen Wafle, a four-star defensive end from the Hun School in Princeton, New Jersey, announced his commitment to Notre Dame on Monday live on CBS Sports HQ. Wafle chose the Fighting Irish over other finalists Iowa, Michigan State, Rutgers and Vanderbilt. 
Wafle is a 6-foot-3, 270-pound edge threat who is ranked No. 175 overall and No. 14 among edge players in the 2024 class, according to the 247Sports Composite rankings. His size heading into his junior season will likely make a move to the interior of the defensive line a possibility once he arrives in college. If that happens, though, Wafle is perfectly fine with it.
"Well, I'm just a guy who likes to go out there and compete," he told Irish Illustrated last month. So, for me, it doesn't really matter where I'm put. I just want to help the team in any way I can. But I do have to say, as of right now, for the college level I feel like I'm a little bit more built towards defensive tackle just because of my height at the moment. But my family grows pretty late"
year. He also played a fullback and caught two touchdowns, which shows just how versatile he can be.
He was offered by Fighting Irish coach Marcus Freeman on March 18, and he has picked up 10 FBS offers since the end of the 2021 high school season.
Jeff Brohm and Josh Heupel were among major risers in the bottom two-thirds of our new rankings
The first college football game ever played took place on Nov. 6, 1869, between New Jersey (to become Princeton) and Rutgers on a field in New Brunswick, New Jersey. Rutgers won 6-4. It was a thriller, but it wasn't as thrilling as what was happening across the Atlantic Ocean in Europe. That's where Swiss chemist Friedrich Miescher made a startling discovery that would change what we knew about life on Earth.
Miescher discovered something within the nuclei of white blood cells in humans that he called "nuclein." The term would change over the years until it became what we now refer to as DNA: the building block of all life. While Miescher couldn't view DNA down to its blockchain at the time, if he were able to look at the DNA of that first college football game between New Jersey and Rutgers, he'd have discovered something else.
Inherent in college football's DNA are rankings. Yes, Rutgers won the game 6-4, but who cares? Which team would we have ranked higher afterward? That's the question. Sure, Rutgers won, but maybe it didn't deserve to? Maybe if the coach hadn't wasted that timeout in the second quarter, New Jersey would have held on, so New Jersey should be ranked ahead of Rutgers. If we're ranking the coaches, though, Rutgers' coach should be ranked ahead of the one who led New Jersey.
College football has changed a lot since that first game, but the same DNA remains today. The powers change, the names change,  the conferences change, but the rankings remain.
As we've done annually, CBS Sports is back ranking the college football coaches of the Power Five conferences (and Notre Dame) ahead of the upcoming season. A panel of our experts turn in their ballots with a simple mission: rank the 65 Power Five coaches from best to worst. There are no parameters for how they should be ranked. One could rank strictly on records or accomplishments. Another could rank on what they think these coaches will accomplish or how they have lived up to expectations. There are no rules, only rankings.
Let's begin our latest presentation of these rankings by examining the 40 coaches who finished outside the top 25. These rankings are final and irrefutable ... until the season begins. (Also, if you don't like where a particular coach is ranked, remember this: I agree with you. It's all my fellow voters who are wrong.)
Power Five coaches ranked 65-26
Luke Fickell continues his reign atop the conference as the AAC welcomes two new coaches this season
The AAC will be undergoing a dramatic makeover following the 2022 football season, as three of its premier football brands -- Cincinnati, Houston and UCF -- are set to depart for the Big 12. The exit of those three will coincide with the arrival of Charlotte, Florida Atlantic, North Texas, UTSA, Rice and UAB from Conference USA. Collectively, the makeover will change the dynamics of the league, which has stood out in recent years from its Group of Five peers for success on the gridiron.
As the transition transpires, a void for coaching leadership within the conference will emerge. Cincinnati coach Luke Fickell, UCF's Gus Malzahn and Houston's Dana Holgorsen are each big names in the profession. The hole created by their absences could allow a new coach such as Jeff Traylor of UTSA, Bill Clark at UAB or Willie Taggart at FAU to come in and claim some early clout. 
Before we get to the future of the AAC, though, there is still one more season to go under the league's current configuration, and it will be coached by a mostly familiar group of men. Stan Drayton is in for Rod Carey at Temple and Rhett Lashlee has replaced Sonny Dykes at SMU, but the other nine coaches are familiar faces returning to the league. 
So without further ado, here is how our staff at CBS Sports voted in a breakdown of the AAC coaches entering 2022. Voters used varying criteria that absorbs head-coaching history, recent on-field results, future potential and intangibles into one ranking.
Fickell solidified his stranglehold atop the AAC coach rankings by leading Cincinnati to a College Football Playoff appearance last season. He is 44-7 over his last four years since posting a 4-8 mark in his debut campaign at the helm. As the first coach to ever guide a Group of Five school to the CFP, Fickell has been provided with opportunities to move up the ladder to the Power Five. Instead, he's building a legacy with a program that will soon be moving on to the Big 12. 2021 AAC ranking: 1
The fact that a 9-4 season felt somewhat disappointing for both Malzahn and UCF in their first year together tells you everything you need to know about the reputation of both parties. Both the former Auburn coach and his new program have done a lot of winning in recent years, and Malzahn's place at No. 2 in this ranking is an endorsement from our voters of their future together. Without an injury to star quarterback Dillon Gabriel, Year 1 would likely have been a 10-win season. As it stands, knocking off the flagship Florida Gators in a bowl game was a great way for Malzahn to cap his first season with the Knights.
 2021 AAC ranking: 3 (+1)
Niumatalolo remains the longest-tenured of the AAC's coaches as he enters his 15th season leading the Midshipmen. In their seven years in the league under Niumatalolo's guidance, Navy has gone 7-1 in AAC play on three occasions. But the lean years have been rough, and more common, as of late. After landing at No. 2 in the ranking in 2020 and 2021, Niumatalolo slipped a bit this year following his team's 4-8 season. Since finishing 11-2 in 2019, the Midshipmen are 7-15 (6-9 AAC) since. 2021 AAC ranking: 2 (-2)
Fritz's body of work holds up pretty well, even after a 2-10 season in 2021. In six years with the Green Wave, he's led the program to three bowl games. Prior to his arrival, Tulane had been to three bowls in 20 years. With a bunch of returning production and a much easier nonconference schedule than last year's slate which featured Oklahoma and Ole Miss, don't be surprised if the Green Wave find themselves in the hunt for bowl eligibility during a challenging final stretch against UCF, SMU and Cincinnati in November. 2021 AAC ranking: 5
Montgomery is the second-longest tenured coach in the AAC as he enters his eighth season leading the Golden Hurricane. It's been an up-and-down ride marked by the high of a 10-win season in 2017 and the lows of a 9-27 mark between 2018-20. The former Baylor offensive coordinator survived the rough patch and has led Tulsa to consecutive bowl games. He nearly orchestrated a couple of big upsets last season and did well to rally Tulsa from an 0-3 start. 2021 AAC ranking: 7 (+1)
After debuting at No. 11 in his first season as coach in 2020 and sliding up two spots to No. 9 last year, Silverfield again rises two spots this year. Despite his upward trajectory in the rankings, Year 3 marks a critical juncture for Silverfield, who is following two stalwarts of the Memphis football resurgence in Justin Fuente and Mike Norvell. Silverfield is 14-10 (8-8 AAC) and coming off a 6-6 season. He's kept the train on the tracks, but it's unclear if the locomotive has the necessary chops to make the Tigers the class of a new-look AAC in the future. 2021 AAC ranking: 9 (+2)
After posting a 37-6 record in three seasons at James Madison, including a 28-2 mark in his first two years, Houston's build at ECU has been predictably slower. However, the Pirates made some major progress in 2021 by finishing 7-5 and snapping a six-year bowl drought in his third season. Given Houston's winning track record at multiple collegiate levels and ECU's present momentum, there is a case to be made that he should be higher on this list. 2021 AAC ranking: 10 (+2)
After getting the Mustangs ranked at some point during each of the past three seasons, Sonny Dykes left for TCU and opened the door for Lashlee to get his first head-coaching opportunity. The 38-year-old served as SMU's offensive coordinator under Dykes in 2018 and 2019 and helped usher in the program's best era since its return from the death penalty in the 1980s. Considering his familiarity with SMU and additional experience as the offensive coordinator at Auburn and Miami, Lashlee looks like a solid hire on paper. 2021 AAC ranking: N/A
Scott is just 3-18 through two seasons after more than a decade on Dabo Swinney's staff at Clemson, and only one of those victories is against an FBS opponent. The hope is that this can be a turnaround season, as the Bulls have tons of returning production and a big transfer class coming in, headlined by former Baylor quarterback Gerry Bohanon. But with nonconference games against BYU, at Florida and at Louisville, reaching bowl eligibility won't be easy. If USF doesn't show significant progress in 2022, it's fair to wonder if Scott will get another season. 
This isn't FSU, Miami, Florida or even UCF. But Scott's predecessors have shown that South Florida is a school that can win at respectable levels.
 2021 AAC ranking: 10 (+1)