More than half of Americans – 56% – disapprove of Joe Biden’s performance as the president of the United States, as the US leader’s approval rating has hit a new low, plunging to 39%, according to a new opinion poll reported by NBC News. 
As they now have to pay more for their food, gas, rent, and other bills, 65% of Americans claim their family’s income is falling behind the cost of living due to the skyrocketing inflation the US is facing today. As a result, only 33% of those polled approve of Biden’s handling of the economy, according to the survey. 
The poll also suggests that 75% of Americans believe their country is headed in the wrong direction. The last time Americans felt this way was during the Great Recession in 2008, when that number surpassed 75%. 
Biden sends US troops back to SomaliaREAD MORE: Biden sends US troops back to Somalia
“It is a flashing red light when you see a number like this,” said Republican pollster Bill McInturff of Public Opinion Strategies, who conducted this survey. “Americans are telling us this is as bad as 2008,” he added. 
The study comes as America is preparing for the upcoming primaries for November’s midterm elections. Concerned with ever-rising expenses as well as various political issues ranging from immigration and climate change to election integrity and gun rights, supporters of both parties are more likely to vote in these midterms, the pollsters suggest. It is especially true for Democrats, most of whom support a woman’s constitutional right to an abortion, which has recently come into question.
Musk raises concerns over US economy
The country is probably in a recession that could last up to 18 months, he said
Musk raises concerns over US economy
Billionaire Elon Musk said on Monday that the US economy is probably in a recession that could last anywhere from a year to 18 months. He suggested, however, that recessions aren’t necessarily a bad thing, adding that he’s been through a few of them in his time in public companies.
“These things pass and then there will be boom times again,” he told the All-In Summit in Miami Beach. “It will probably be some tough going for, I don’t know, a year, maybe 12-18 months.”
Musk went on to say, “What tends to happen is, if you have a boom that goes on for too long, you get misallocation of capital – it starts raining money on fools, basically.”
The billionaire also slammed the government for printing “a zillion” more dollars than it has.
“This administration, it doesn’t seem to get a lot done,” Musk said. “The Trump administration, leaving Trump aside, there were a lot of people in the administration who were effective at getting things done.”
“The obvious reason for inflation is the government printed a zillion amount of more money than it had. The government can’t just issue checks for an excessive revenue without there being inflation. Velocity of money held constant,” he said, adding: “This is not, like, super complicated.”